---
title: "Nature's Savant"
source: "https://www.worldanvil.com/w/abryryim-clarkjo03/a/nature-s-savant-article"
author:
  - "[[clarkjo03]]"
published:
created: 2026-06-13
description: "World Anvil is a worldbuilding tools platform and community for writers, RPG storytellers and worldbuilding lovers"
tags:
  - "clippings"
---
**Nature’s Savant** Beginning when you select this subclass at 2nd level, the gold and time you must spend to copy a Conjuration spell into your spellbook is halved. **Gaia’s Ally:** When you adopt this subclass, you gain the ability to summon a primal Beast, which draws its power from the land and your bond with nature. The beast is friendly to you (and your companions if you choose) and obeys all of your commands. Its stat block listed below uses your proficiency bonus (abbreviated to ‘PB’) in several places. You can determine the kind of animal the beast is, choosing a kind appropriate for the stat block. In combat, the beast acts during your turn whenever you choose for it to. It can move and use its reaction on its own accord, but the only action it takes is the Dodge action, unless you take a bonus action on your turn to command it to take a different action. That action can be one in its stat block or some other action a Beast is capable of taking. You can also sacrifice one of your attacks when you take the Attack action to command the beast to take the Attack action. If you are incapacitated, the beast can take any action of its choice (not just Dodge), with your protection as its primary focus. If the beast has died within the last hour, you can use your action to touch it and expend a spell slot of 1st level or higher. The beast returns to life after 1 minute with all its hit points restored. When you finish a long rest, you can summon a new primal beast as an Action. The new beast appears in an unoccupied space within 5 feet of you, and you choose its appearance. If you already have a beast from this feature, it vanishes when the new beast appears. The beast also vanishes if you die or are not on the same plane. Gaia’s Ally Medium Beast, Unaligned Armor Class 13 + PB (natural armor) Hit Points 5 + five times your Wizard level (the beast has a number of Hit Dice \[d8s\] equal to your Wizard level) Speed 30 ft., climb 30 ft. STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 14 (+2) 14 (+2) 14 (+2) 8 (-1) 14 (+2) 11 (+0) Senses: darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 12 Languages: understands the languages you speak Challenge — Proficiency Bonus equals your Proficiency bonus Class Level — Special Abilities: Charge. If the beast moves at least 20 feet straight toward a target and then hits it with a maul attack on the same turn, the target takes an extra 1d6 slashing damage. If the target is a creature, it must succeed on a Strength saving throw against your spell save DC or be knocked prone. Primal Bond: You can add your proficiency bonus to any ability check or saving throw that the beast makes. Actions: Maul – Melee Weapon Attack: your spell attack modifier to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 1d8 + Str mod (2) + PB slashing damage. **Improved Ally** Beginning at 6th level, on any of your turns when your beast companion doesn't attack, you can use a bonus action to command the beast to take the Dash, Disengage, or Help action on its turn. In addition, the beast's attacks now count as magical for the purpose of overcoming resistance and immunity to nonmagical attacks and damage. **Gaia’s Fury** Starting at 10th level, when you command your beast ally to take the Attack action, the beast can make two attacks. In addition, choose either Strength, Dexterity, or Constitution; the chosen ability score of your Ally increases by +2. **Nature’s Bond** Beginning at 15th level, when you cast a spell that targets only yourself, you can also affect your beast ally with the spell if the beast is within 30 feet of you. Your Ally may use its reaction to make one melee attack immediately after the spell takes effect.

Remove these ads. [Join the Worldbuilders Guild](https://www.worldanvil.com/pricing)

---

[Powerful Organizations](https://www.worldanvil.com/w/abryryim-clarkjo03/c/powerful-organizations-category)